.TH xfs_healer 8
.SH NAME
xfs_healer \- automatically heal damage to XFS filesystem metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xfs_healer
[
.B OPTIONS
]
.I mount-point
.br
.B xfs_healer \-V
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xfs_healer
is a daemon that tries to automatically repair damaged XFS filesystem metadata.
.PP
.B WARNING!
This program is
.BR EXPERIMENTAL ","
which means that its behavior and interface
could change at any time!
.PP
.B xfs_healer
asks the kernel to report all observations of corrupt metadata, media errors,
filesystem shutdowns, and file I/O errors.
The program can respond to runtime metadata corruption errors by initiating
targeted repairs of the suspect metadata or a full online fsck of the
filesystem.

Normally this program runs as a systemd service.
The service is activated via the
.I xfs_healer_start
service if systemd is supported.

The kernel may not support repairing or optimizing the filesystem.
If this is the case, the filesystem must be unmounted and
.BR xfs_repair (8)
run on the filesystem to fix the problems.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-everything
Ask the kernel to send us good metadata health events, not only events related
to metadata corruption, media errors, shutdowns, and I/O errors.
.TP
.B \-\-foreground
Start enough event handling threads to allow consumption of all online CPUs.
If not specified, start exactly one event handling thread.
.TP
.B \-\-no-autofsck
Do not use the
.I autofsck
filesystem property to decide whether or not to repair corrupt metadata.
If the
.B \-\-repair
option is given, then all corruptions will be repaired.
If the
.B \-\-repair
option is not given, then the program will never try to repair the filesystem.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Do not print every event to standard output.
.TP
.B \-\-repair
Always try to repair each piece of corrupt metadata when the kernel tells us
about it.
If an individual repair fails or the kernel tells us that health events were
lost, the
.I xfs_scrub
service for this mount point will be launched.
The default is not to try to repair anything.
If this option is specified but the kernel does not support repairs, the
program will exit.
.TP
.B \-\-supported
Check if the filesystem supports sending health events.
Exits with 0 if it does, and non-zero if not.
.TP
.BI \-V
Prints the version number and exit.

.SH AUTOFSCK
By default, this program will read the
.I autofsck
filesystem property to decide if it should try to repair corruptions.
If the property is set to these values:

.RS
.TP
.I repair
Corruptions will be repaired.
.TP
.IR check " or " optimize
Corruptions will be logged.
.TP
.I none
The program will exit.
.RE

If the property is not set but the filesystem supports any back-reference
metadata (reverse mappings and parent pointers), then corruptions will be
logged.
If no back-reference metadata are present, the program will exit.

See the
.BR xfs_scrub (8)
manual page for more details on this filesystem property.

.SH CAVEATS
.B xfs_healer
is an immature utility!
Do not run this program unless you have backups of your data!
This program takes advantage of in-kernel scrubbing to verify a given
data structure with locks held and can keep the filesystem busy for a
long time.
The kernel must be new enough to support the SCRUB_METADATA ioctl.
.PP
If errors are found and cannot be repaired, the filesystem must be
unmounted and repaired.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xfs_repair (8)
and
.BR xfs_scrub (8).
