.\" Copyright (c) 2025-2026, Oracle.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.TH IOCTL-XFS-VERIFY-MEDIA 2 2026-01-09 "XFS"
.SH NAME
ioctl_xfs_verify_media \- verify the media of the devices backing XFS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B #include <xfs/xfs_fs.h>
.PP
.BI "int ioctl(int " fd ", XFS_IOC_VERIFY_MEDIA, struct xfs_verify_media *" arg );
.SH DESCRIPTION
Verify the media of a storage device backing an XFS filesystem.
If errors are found, report the error to the kernel so that it can generate
health events for the health monitoring system and fsnotify.
The verification request is conveyed in a structure of the following form:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_verify_media {
	__u32	me_dev;
	__u32	me_flags;
	__u64	me_start_daddr;
	__u64	me_end_daddr;
	__u32	me_ioerror;
	__u32	me_max_io_size;
	__u32	me_rest_us;
	__u32	me_pad;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The field
.I me_pad
must be zero.
.PP
The field
.I me_ioerror
will be set if the ioctl returns success.
.PP
The fields
.I me_start_daddr
and
.I me_end_daddr
are the range of the storage device to verify.
Both values must be in units of 512-byte blocks.
The
.I me_start_daddr
field is inclusive, and the
.I me_end_daddr
field is exclusive.
If
.I me_end_daddr
is larger than the size of the device, the kernel will set it to the size of
the device.

If the system call returns success and any part of the storage device range was
successfully verified, the
.I me_start_daddr
field will be updated to reflect the successful verification.
If after this update the
.I me_start_daddr
is equal to
.IR me_end_daddr ,
then the entire range was verified successfully.

If not, then a media error was encountered and the caller should generate a
series of secondary calls to this ioctl with smaller ranges to discover the
exact location and type of media error.
The type of media error will be written to the
.I me_ioerror
field.

The
.I me_max_io_size
field, if nonzero, is an upper bound on the I/O operations that the kernel will
issue to the block device.

The
.I me_rest_us
is the time duration, in microseconds, for which the kernel will wait between
issuing I/O operations.

.PP
The field
.I me_dev
must be one of the following values:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_DEV_DATA
Verify the data device.
.TP
.B XFS_DEV_LOG
Verify the external log device.
.TP
.B XFS_DEV_RT
Verify the realtime device.
.RE
.PP
The field
.I me_flags
is a bitmask of one of the following values:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_VERIFY_MEDIA_REPORT
Report all media errors to fsnotify.
.RE

The
.IR me_max_io_size
field, if nonzero, will be used as advice for the maximum size of the IO to
send to the device.

The
.I me_rest_us
field will cause the kernel to pause for this many microseconds between IO
requests.

.SH RETURN VALUE
On runtime error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
If 0 is returned, then
.I start_daddr
or
.I ioerror
will be updated.
.PP
.SH ERRORS
Error codes can be one of, but are not limited to, the following:
.TP
.B EPERM
The calling process does not have sufficient privilege.
.TP
.B EINVAL
One or more of the arguments specified is invalid.
.TP
.B EFAULT
The
.I arg
structure could not be copied into the kernel.
.TP
.B ENODEV
The device is not present.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
There was not enough memory to perform the verification.

.SH I/O ERRORS
The
.I ioerror
field could be set to one of the following:
.TP
.B 0
The verification I/O succeeded.
.TP
.B EOPNOTSUPP
.TP
.B ETIMEDOUT
The kernel timed out the verification I/O command.
.TP
.B ENOLINK
The transportation link to the storage device was down temporarily.
.TP
.B EREMOTEIO
The storage target controller suffered a critical error.
.TP
.B ENODATA
The storage target media suffered a critical error.
.TP
.B EILSEQ
Storage protection metadata did not validate successfully.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
There was not enough memory to allocate an I/O request.
.TP
.B ENODEV
The storage device is offline.
.TP
.B ETIME
The storage device timed out the I/O command.
.TP
.B EINVAL
The I/O request was rejected by the device for being invalid.
.TP
.B EIO
An I/O error occurred but no specific details are available.
.RE
.PP
This list is not exhaustive and may grow in the future.

.SH CONFORMING TO
This API is specific to XFS filesystem on the Linux kernel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ioctl_xfs_health_monitor (2)
