.\" Copyright (c) 2025-2026, Oracle.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.TH IOCTL-XFS-HEALTH-FD-ON-MONITORED-FS 2 2026-01-04 "XFS"
.SH NAME
ioctl_xfs_health_fd_on_monitored_fs \- check if the given fd belongs to the same fs being monitored
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B #include <xfs/xfs_fs.h>
.PP
.BI "int ioctl(int " healthmon_fd ", XFS_IOC_HEALTH_FD_ON_MONITORED_FS, struct xfs_health_file_on_monitored_fs *" arg );
.SH DESCRIPTION
This XFS healthmon fd ioctl asks the kernel driver if the file descriptor
passed in via
.I arg
points to a file on the same filesystem that is being monitored by
.IR healthmon_fd .
The file descriptor is conveyed in a structure of the following form:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_file_on_monitored_fs {
	__s32 fd;
	__u32 flags;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The field
.I flags
must be zero.
.PP
The field
.I fd
is a descriptor of an open file.
.PP
The argument
.I healthmon_fd
must be a file opened via the
.B XFS_IOC_HEALTH_MONITOR
ioctl.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
If the file descriptor points to a file on the same filesystem that is being
monitored, 0 is returned.
.PP
.SH ERRORS
Error codes can be one of, but are not limited to, the following:
.TP
.B ESTALE
The open file is not on the same filesystem that is being monitored.
.TP
.B EINVAL
One or more of the arguments specified is invalid.
.TP
.B EBADF
.I arg.fd
does not refer to an open file.
.TP
.B EFAULT
The
.I arg
structure could not be copied into the kernel.
.TP
.B ENOTTY
.I healthmon_fd
is not a XFS health monitoring file.
.SH CONFORMING TO
This API is specific to XFS filesystem on the Linux kernel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ioctl_xfs_health_monitor (2)
