.\" Copyright (c) 2025-2026, Oracle.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" %%%LICENSE_START(GPLv2+_DOC_FULL)
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+
.\" %%%LICENSE_END
.TH IOCTL-XFS-HEALTH-MONITOR 2 2026-01-04 "XFS"
.SH NAME
ioctl_xfs_health_monitor \- read filesystem health events from the kernel
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B #include <xfs/xfs_fs.h>
.PP
.BI "int ioctl(int " dest_fd ", XFS_IOC_HEALTH_MONITOR, struct xfs_health_monitor *" arg );
.SH DESCRIPTION
This XFS ioctl asks the kernel driver to create a pseudo-file from which
information about adverse filesystem health events can be read.
This new file will be installed into the file descriptor table of the calling
process as a read-only file, and will have the close-on-exec flag set.
.PP
The specific behaviors of this health monitor file are requested via a
structure of the following form:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor {
	__u64 flags;
	__u8  format;
	__u8  pad[23];
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The field
.I pad
must be zero.
.PP
The field
.I format
controls the format of the event data that can be read:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_FMT_V0
Event data will be presented in discrete objects of type struct
xfs_health_monitor_event.
See below for more information.
.RE

.PD 1
.PP
The field
.I flags
control the behavior of the monitor.
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_VERBOSE
Return all health events, including affirmations of healthy metadata.
.RE
.SH RETURN VALUE
On error, \-1 is returned, and
.I errno
is set to indicate the error.
Otherwise, the return value is a new file descriptor.
.PP
.SH ERRORS
Error codes can be one of, but are not limited to, the following:
.TP
.B EEXIST
Health monitoring is already active for this filesystem.
.TP
.B EPERM
The caller does not have permission to open a health monitor.
Calling programs must have administrative capability, run in the initial user
namespace, and the
.I fd
passed to ioctl must be the root directory of an XFS filesystem.
.TP
.B EINVAL
One or more of the arguments specified is invalid.
.TP
.B EFAULT
The argument could not be copied into the kernel.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
There was not sufficient memory to construct the health monitor.
.SH EVENT FORMAT
Calling programs retrieve XFS health events by calling
.BR read (2)
on the returned file descriptor.
The read buffer must be large enough to hold at least one event object.
Partial objects will not be returned; instead, a short read will occur.

Events will be returned in the following format:

.PP
.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_event {
	__u32	domain;
	__u32	type;
	__u64	time_ns;

	union {
		struct xfs_health_monitor_lost lost;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_fs fs;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_group group;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_inode inode;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_shutdown shutdown;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_media media;
		struct xfs_health_monitor_filerange filerange;
	} e;

	__u64	pad[2];
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The field
.I time_ns
records the timestamp at which the health event was generated, in units of
nanoseconds since the Unix epoch.
.PP
The field
.I pad
will be zero.
.PP
The field
.I domain
indicates the scope of the filesystem affected by the event:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_MOUNT
The entire filesystem is affected.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_FS
Metadata concerning the entire filesystem is affected.
Details are available through the
.I fs
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_AG
Metadata concerning a specific allocation group is affected.
Details are available through the
.I group
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_RTGROUP
Metadata concerning a specific realtime allocation group is affected.
Details are available through the
.I group
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_INODE
File metadata is affected.
Details are available through the
.I inode
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_DATADEV
The main data volume is affected.
Details are available through the
.I media
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_RTDEV
The realtime volume is affected.
Details are available through the
.I media
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_LOGDEV
The external log is affected.
Details are available through the
.I media
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_DOMAIN_FILERANGE
File data is affected.
Details are available through the
.I filerange
field.
.RE

.PP
The field
.I type
indicates what was affected by a health event:
.RS 0.4i
.PP
The following types apply to events from the
.B MOUNT
domain.
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_RUNNING
This filesystem health monitor is now running.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_LOST
Health events were lost.
Details are available through the
.I lost
field.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_UNMOUNT
The filesystem is being unmounted.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_SHUTDOWN
The filesystem has shut down due to problems.
Details are available through the
.I shutdown
field.
.RE
.PP
The following three types apply to events from the
.BR FS ,
.BR AG ,
.BR RTGROUP ,
and
.B INODE
domains.
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_SICK
Filesystem metadata has been scanned by online fsck and found to be corrupt.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_CORRUPT
A metadata corruption problem was encountered during a filesystem operation
outside of fsck.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_HEALTHY
Filesystem metadata has either been scanned by online fsck and found to be
in good condition, or it has been repaired to good condition.
.RE
.PP
The following type applies to events from the
.BR DATADEV ,
.BR RTDEV ,
and
.B LOGDEV
domains.
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_MEDIA_ERROR
A media error has been observed on one of the storage devices that can be
attached to an XFS filesystem.
.RE
.PP
The following types apply to events from the
.B FILERANGE
domain.
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_BUFREAD
An attempt to read (or readahead) from a file failed with an I/O error.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_BUFWRITE
An attempt to write dirty data to storage failed with an I/O error.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_DIOREAD
A direct read of file data from storage failed with an I/O error.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_DIOWRITE
A direct write of file data to storage failed with an I/O error.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_MONITOR_TYPE_DATALOST
A latent media error was discovered on the storage backing part of this file.
.RE
.RE

.PP
The union
.I e
contains further details about the health event:

.RS 0.4i
.PP
The kernel will use no more than 32KiB of memory per monitoring file to queue
health events.
If this limit is exceeded, an event will be generated to describe how many
events were lost:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_lost {
	__u64	count;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I count
field records the number of events lost.

.PP
If whole-filesystem metadata experiences a health event, the exact type of
that metadata is recorded as follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_fs {
	__u32	mask;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I mask
field will contain
.I XFS_FSOP_GEOM_SICK_*
flags that are documented in the
.BR ioctl_xfs_fsgeometry (2)
manual page.

.PP
If an allocation group (realtime or data) experiences a health event,
the exact type and location of the metadata is recorded as follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_group {
	__u32	mask;
	__u32	gno;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I mask
field will contain
.I XFS_AG_SICK_*
flags that are documented in the
.BR ioctl_xfs_ag_geometry (2)
manual page, or the
.I XFS_RTGROUP_SICK_*
flags that are documented by the
.BR ioctl_xfs_rtgroup_geometry (2)
manual page.
.PP
The
.I gno
field will contain the group number.

.PP
If a file experiences a health event, the exact type and handle to the file
is recorded as follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_inode {
	__u32	mask;
	__u32	gen;
	__u64	ino;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I mask
field will contain
.I XFS_BS_SICK_*
flags that are documented by the
.BR ioctl_xfs_bulkstat (2)
manual page.
.PP
The
.I ino
and
.I gen
fields describe a handle to the affected file.

.PP
If the filesystem shuts down abnormally, the exact reasons are recorded as
follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_shutdown {
	__u32	reasons;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I reasons
field is a combination of the following values:
.RS 0.4i
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_META_IO_ERROR
Metadata I/O errors were encountered.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_LOG_IO_ERROR
Log I/O errors were encountered.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_FORCE_UMOUNT
The filesystem was forcibly shut down by an administrator.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_CORRUPT_INCORE
In-memory metadata are corrupt.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_CORRUPT_ONDISK
On-disk metadata are corrupt.
.TP
.B XFS_HEALTH_SHUTDOWN_DEVICE_REMOVED
Storage devices were removed.
.RE

.PP
If a media error is discovered on the storage device, the exact location is
recorded as follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_media {
	__u64	daddr;
	__u64	bbcount;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I daddr
and
.I bbcount
fields describe the range of the storage that were lost.
Both are provided in units of 512-byte blocks.

.PP
If a problem is discovered with regular file data, the handle of the file
and the exact range of the file are recorded as follows:

.in +4n
.nf
struct xfs_health_monitor_filerange {
	__u64	pos;
	__u64	len;
	__u64	ino;
	__u32	gen;
	__u32	error;
};
.fi
.in
.PP
The
.I ino
and
.I gen
fields describe a handle to the affected file.
The
.I pos
and
.I len
fields describe the range of the file data that are affected.
Both are provided in units of bytes.
.PP
The
.I error
field describes the error that occurred.
See the
.BR errno (3)
manual page for more information.
.RE
.SH CONFORMING TO
This API is specific to XFS filesystem on the Linux kernel.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ioctl_xfs_health_fd_on_monitored_fs (2)
